the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
well you gotta move up to the next
lowest energy orbital which we'll also
talk about today alright so that kind of
completes our one electron systems and
now we're going to talk about multi
electrons where we're not going to move
far away from the topics that we've
discussed because with multi electrons
there are several things that are the
same and some things that are different
but a lot of things are the same so
we're going to come back to radial
probability distributions and energy
levels and things like that alright so
we'll move on to today's handout so
similarities and differences
similarities we have the same shapes of
orbitals whether we're talking about a
one electron system or more so again
we're gonna have our s orbital so this
is my version of an S orbital that you
can hold in your hand where you have its
Fira Klee symmetric and you have
probability out in every direction of R
that you might find an electron except
at our radial nodes and then we have our
P orbitals which can be in three
different directions where you have
nodal planes so it doesn't matter what
you're talking about one electron system
or more you still are going to have
those same shapes of the wave functions
other similarities again include the
nodal structure which I just mentioned
whether s is always going to be
spherically symmetrical P is going to
have those nodal planes the angular
nodal planes so that's the same
differences though have to do with the
energy levels so orbitals in a
multi-electron atoms are lower more
negative in energy
then their corresponding orbitals in the
H atom so let's take a look at this and
think about why this is true so here we
have our friend the hydrogen atom it has
a small Z Z equals one doesn't get
smaller than that we have our 1s then we
have our N equals two and we talked
about the fact that in a one electron
system like hydrogen these are all
degenerate in energy with respect to
each other so they're all equal in
energy and then we have our N equals 3
again degenerate energy levels and N
equals 4 up here but when you go to a
multi electron system the first thing
that will point out is that the energy
level is lower so we have 1s over here
now 1s is a more negative lower number
and we can think about this in multi
electron systems you have a bigger Z so
you have more positive charge and it's
kind of hauling all of those energy
levels closer and so it's it's a lower
energy for all of those so 1s again
lower and we have 2's again that's lower
in energy and now importantly 2s and 2p
are no longer degenerate with respect to
each other in energy so now the 2p
system is higher in energy than the 1s
and so on so we have 3s down here and
then the 3 p's so compared to hydrogen
in a multi-electron atom and is not the
sole determinant of what the energy
levels are now instead of just n we have
N and L so let's review this is good
this is all getting ready for the test
some equations that you've seen before
and again equations will be on the
equation sheet you don't have to
memorize them and the equation sheet for
the exam is handed out today so you can
take a look at it and see where things
are if I forgot
anything you can ask me questions and
maybe it will add some more if I forgot
anyone's alright so for a one electron
system binding energy equals minus the
ionization energy equals minus Z squared
RH the Redbird constant over N squared
and so for hydrogen Z is one but there
other one electron at least ions and
then you have to worry about Z alright
what about a multi electron system looks
pretty much the same but now instead of
just having n we have N and L because L
matters with a multi electron system so
the binding energy for the electron is
minus the ionization energy that's
always going to true the binding energy
is always going to be equal to minus the
ionization energy which is equal to
minus Z but now we have a different Z we
have Z effective which is abbreviated Z
e FF so this is the effective charge not
the actual charge and that's squared and
then we have Redbird constant and and
again so Z effective is not the same as
Z and it's not the same as e because of
shielding so we talked about shielding a
little bit and I made this point that
you need to think about shielding a
little differently it's not just about
the average size of the orbital it's
more about the likelihood the
probability that they're going to be
electrons close to the nucleus that will
participate in and that will be affected
by shielding so let's look at some
extreme cases now and think about what's
happening in terms of this shielding so
extreme case one extreme shielding
maximum shielding all right so we have
the case we have the helium nucleus
we've moved far in the periodic table
we've left hydrogen and so what is the
charge going to be on helium nucleus
plus 2 so now we have this election
one we're interested in how much this
electron is shielded by electron tooks
we got two electrons now say electron
two is close to the nucleus and it's
maximally shielding electron one from
this positive charge down here so think
about this electron I like to think
about this this electron two as kind of
the last girl of electrons so Elastigirl
electron is shielding everywhere
stretching everywhere around that
nucleus just completely shielding it
from electron one using the full full
negative charge to really shield so in
that kind of exaggerated case the Z
effective is not two it's one so this
electron basically cancels the whole
positive charge of this nucleus really
shields that away and so this is the
effective charge with total shielding
maximal shielding that you can get so
now we can calculate what the binding
energy or if we wanted what the
ionization energy would be for this case
given that particular effective charge
so again the binding energy of electron
1 is equal to minus its ionization
energy equal to minus the Z effective
squared RH over N squared and we can
plug in those numbers don't forget the
minus we can have the effective 1 over 1
and we calculate this value which is of
course just the Redbird constant or
minus the Redbird constant minus 2 2.18
times 10 to the minus 18 joules so this
is just like it was a hydrogen atom a 1
electron system so it had 2 electrons
but one of the electrons shielded so
completely it was like a 1 electron
system again this is an exaggerated case
of total shielding so now let's go to
the other extreme
and consider zero shielding no shielding
at all so here we have the helium
nucleus we have electron one is now
closed and electron two is pretty far
away so again we're asking how much is
this electron one going to be shielded
by electron two and in this extreme
scenario electron two is not
participating in shielding at all it's
far away I'm not sure what it's doing
maybe it lost its super suit and can't
find it it might be at the drycleaners
we don't know what's going on in any
case it is out of the game it is not
involved it is not shielding at all
so in this extreme case electron one
feels that full force of the nucleus so
it's effective charge is the full
complete plus two so we can plug that in
now and calculate what the binding
energy is going to be again binding
energy for electron one equals minus the
ionization energy for this electron same
equation we put this in but now the Z
effective is two and we can calculate
that and now we get a value of minus
eight point seven two times ten to the
minus eighteenth joules and this is
actually the same as you would get for
the scenario of helium plus which is a
one electron system then in a one
electron system you can use a formula of
just see where Z is two and get your
value so here are the two extreme cases
for helium one it's like a hydrogen atom
one electron system and one it's like
helium plus in one case it's like it
just has one electron and in in the
other case you have zero shielding so
extreme case one the Z effective is one
and we have the binding energy that's
very similar to hydrogen and so this is
a total shielding case it shields so
much it's like a
one electron case extreme case - you
have the full force there's zero
shielding no shielding at all and then
this is like a helium plus case where
you've actually lost that other electron
it's not shielding it's not even there
so no shielding and the reality in most
cases is that you're in between and you
can determine this experimentally you
can measure ionization energies so if we
measured the ionization energy for
helium we would find that it's three
point nine four times ten to the minus
18th so it's greater than the 2.18
and less than the eight point seven two
so it's in between and that's what you
find most of the time the Z effective is
in between zero shielding and total
shielding so we can calculate what the Z
effective is actually in this case if we
know the ionization energy so if you
know the ionization energy you can
calculate the Z effective or if you're
given as the effective you can calculate
what the ionization energy should be for
that case and so I told you that it was
measured at three point nine four times
ten to the minus eighteenth and so in
that case the Z effective if you plug it
plug the numbers in would be one point
three four and so this number is in fact
in between the two cases with total
shielding you would have a Z effective
of one and with no shielding you'd have
a Z effective of two and so in reality
we're somewhere in between in this case
all right so thinking about this now
let's try your hand at a clicker
question and see if you can tell me
which of these is a possible Z effective
for an an element with a Z equals three
okay ten more seconds
okay so does someone want to say why the
other ones are not correct
hey why don't you run up there and you
can give them this pen American Chemical
Society pen hand up there I think it's
on so in the case of no shielding that
charge would be three and in the case of
maximum shielding there's only two
electrons in the 1s so it'd be one so
anything below one would be beyond
maximum shielding it's got to be between
one and three yep that's right okay so
now we're gonna talk more about why
shielding is important and shielding
really has to do with this order of
orbital energy that we all know and are
very fond of so when I show you this we
want to ask the question why is 2 s
lower than two P or 3 s lower than 3p so
let's take a look at this and we're
going to go back to our radial
probability distribution so here again
if we're considering 2s and 2p so we'll
consider this case here the maximum
probable radius is longer it's greater
for 2s than for 2p but what we really
care about when we're talking about
shielding is this part right here and so
there different ways you can express
this you can say that the electrons in
the orbital with lower values of L like
2s is lower than 2p those electrons
penetrate closer to the nucleus even
though we have this trend where the
radius decreases with increasing else so
despite this size difference when you
compare this dotted line with this line
here there's more probability that there
going to be a lot
Tron's near the nucleus with two s and
that results in this lower energy so
there's less shielding for the s
orbitals than for the P orbitals and as
a result of that with less shielding
because their probability is that
they're closer that they're bound more
tightly you of this lower energy so that
explains this energy difference so we
can look at this now for the three
system again for N equals three and here
we see that P electrons are also less
shielded than the D electrons despite
the fact if you look that the most
probable radius over here is longer for
P than for D but now if we look near the
nucleus at the probability that they're
going to be electrons near the nucleus
there's a higher probability that
they'll be electrons near the nucleus
with P than with D so these are going to
be less shielded and lower in energy and
if I throw s on there now we see s has
the most probability here of being
closer than P then D so for a
multi-electron atom the order of energy
we have s low it lower than P P lower
than DD lower than F due to this
shielding so again we want to be able to
want to be able to draw some version of
these diagrams with appropriate features
to explain answers and this all leads
into what we're doing next which is
electron configurations so we're going
to think about how we're going to write
the electron configurations and this
indicates how you build up in energy so
electron configurations so first we're
going to fill our electrons in to the
energy states that are our lowest nature
doesn't want to do a lot of work so it's
gonna put them in the lower states
and again where those energy levels are
depends on for multi-electron atoms both
N and L and we're going to put them in
one electron at a time starting with the
lowest energy state and heating the
following rules so there's some rules in
doing this and most of you probably
heard some of these before and if you
haven't I'm sure you'll like them I know
you heard this because I already just
told you about that a few minutes ago we
have Pauli's exclusion principle which
says that you can't have the same four
quantum numbers so if you put one
electron in you need and it's been up
the next one has to be spin down and
hunts roll which is one of my favorite
rules I think in chemistry and that is
when you're adding electrons to the same
state you're going to put them in singly
when there's degenerate energy orbitals
before a second one enters the same
orbital and the spins remain parallel as
you're adding them across so let's
consider these and put some electrons
into these and we'll do this for oxygen
which is a Z equals 8 system so first I
want to put them in the lowest energy
State so that's 1s so I'll put one
electron in there and then I'm going to
put the second electron in there because
it's the lowest energy State so I'm
gonna fill it up but I'm gonna pay
attention to Pauli's exclusion principle
and put it in spin down one electron
spin up one electron spin down I can't
put them both spin up because they would
have the same four quantum numbers and
that would violate Pauli's exclusion
principle
so next I'm gonna put electrons in 2's
because that's the next lowest energy
state I'll put one in spin up and then
because of Polly I'll put the other one
in spin down next we come to the 2p
system and I'm going to put the first
electron in but I'm not going to pair
the second one I'm going to put electron
in the second orbital both being spin up
and then I'm going to do that again
and so I I like to most people kind of
refer to the Hans rule is kind of the
the the role of seating on a bus where
it always seems that one person goes in
and even though there are two seats one
person takes it the next person gets on
the bus doesn't sit next to the person
who's already there they take another
empty seat and so on and so on and so
you fill up the bus with one person per
bench before all those seats are taken
the next person comes on sadly has to
sit with someone else so if you think
about that that's the huns role you'll
always remember to do that and once
you've put one in each then the next
person on the bus has to sit next to
someone and they're gonna do that spin
down because if it would spin up again
you'd have the same four quantum numbers
so these are the rules that you need to
know to put these in and then after you
do that you can write an electron
configuration that says what you did so
here we can write it this way we'll say
we have one s two there are two
electrons in the 1s 2s - two electrons
in 2s and 2p four we have four electrons
in the 2p orbitals and if for some
reason the question asks you to specify
M sub L you can do that - so then
instead of just saying - P four then you
would say - px - so there were two
electrons in px and then 2 PZ 1 and 2 py
1 and if you don't write one one is
implied so you will see this both ways
you will see the one indicated and then
you'll see the orbital just listed with
nothing if you do that you were implying
there's one electron in there you don't
mean to apply there's one electron in
there don't write it that way because
that's what is implied if that's the way
it is alright so now let's do a clicker
question
okay ten more seconds I think we can get
at least 93% on this one
that's not bad 90 knows a decent gas
that was a decent guess okay so I think
the trick here was just counting so the
bottom the bottom one that some people
liked there are only six electrons in
that that has more okay yep yeah it just
yeah you don't have to worry about that
yeah use that's kind of arbitrary white
what you put for that so it just if it
is indicated then that's fine but we
didn't give you an option that would be
different yeah okay so now you can
imagine that if you're writing these
electron configurations and you're asked
to write an electron configuration for
something way down on the periodic table
you would be writing for a very very
very long time
so you can use information about core
electrons and valence electrons to make
your life easier now sometimes you will
be asked to write the full electron
configuration and it'll say don't use
kind of the noble gas shorthand then
that's what you have to do very
important on the exam read questions
carefully so let's introduce this
concept of core electrons and valence
electrons so if we look at the periodic
table we have our one s 1 1 s 1 1 s 2
and then we come down we have our two
S's and our two PS and then we have a
noble gas and then we come down and we
have our first 3 s 1 and so if we're
talking about sodium we have core
electrons which are the electrons that
make up the noble gas noble gas element
that's on the Theroux before and then
those are usually not very reactive
they're held pretty tight and the
valence electrons the valence electrons
the electrons that do all the exciting
chemistry you lose and gain valence
electrons they're the fun ones and so
those are going to be
and that noble gas configuration those
core electrons and so here sodium has 1
3 s 1 so we can also write sodium then
as bracket neon indicating the noble gas
before and then just put the valence
electrons the 3 s 1 and unless it's
clearly specified you are not supposed
to do that this will be acceptable so we
can go on in a row of the periodic table
in the third period and so the next one
we would have 3 s 2 and then we jump
over here to the 3 p's and so on and so
on until we get to our next noble gas so
this is pretty straightforward there no
exceptions on the third period but when
we get to the fourth period of the
periodic table we start to have a couple
of exceptions that you will be
responsible for and so it's looking good
up here in the beginning we have now our
noble gas and then we have our valence
electron 4s1 4s2 and then we start down
in the 3 DS over here and when we get
halfway through we have an exception so
you have exceptions halfway through and
also when you're almost at the end so
instead of having 4s 2 3 D 4 it really
wants to have 5 electrons and in this
case instead of 4s 2 3 D 9 it wants 10
so it likes things being half full or
totally full and so you have these
exceptions there so you don't have a d4
and you don't have a d9 and you're
responsible for these two and then in
the period right below same position
same exception so you can think about
this I don't know if it's for exceptions
or really just kind of two in two places
but these are the exceptions you need to
know so in the fifth it's
the ones right below are the same you're
not going to have a d4 or a d9 here so
you bump one up because it's just
happier when it has five or ten
electrons in the D orbitals all right
you're also responsible for knowing the
orders oh we have a question way up
there who wants to run get some exercise
I don't always see questions so yell out
my name if I if I don't see people I am
wearing my glasses that's good yeah so
what happens when we have an ion like
titanium true my question I'm getting to
that all right
okay hold on a minute yes we're getting
two ions there right at the end okay so
first let's consider what happens when
we're not doing an ion and there are a
couple different ways that we can look
at this you can this is one way to
remember so you just write out 1s 2s 2p
3s your fours your 5s or 6 or 7 and then
draw a line so you go first you fill 1s
then 2s 2p 3s 3p 4s D 3d 4p 5s etc etc
etc that works that's one way to do it
it's kind of time-consuming not sure
that's that's the easiest way the other
way that you can do this is the periodic
table you'll be getting on the exam and
you can just remember what's happening
at these different cases so over here
we're filling up our asses over here
we're filling up our Peas except for
helium over here we're doing our DS and
the transition metals over here we have
F and then in terms of the period
numbers so we have one over here so we
do 1 as 2 2 s 2 or 1 s 1 1 s 2 2 s then
we come over here we have the two peas 3
s's
three peas for s's then we have four DS
and go to four peas five s's four DS v
peas and then we can't forget when we
get down here that we have F what number
goes here for right so when you get to
principal quantum number four is when
you start having F orbitals so if you
just remember this it's going to help
you think about what the energy level is
how you're going to write those
configurations alright so maybe I'll
leave this up and we'll do a clicker
question now on this and you have your
periodic table available to look at and
then we'll get two ions
this should be 93% yeah
okay ten seconds
well 85 that's still pretty good okay so
this this one was our our one of our
exceptions over here and we wanted to
have no no d9 so it just is happier as
d-10 system so that's our exception one
of the four that you need to know for
this okay so now we have our two are
kind of two methods of remembering this
and we did the clicker question and so
I'm going to jump to ions people are
there's one question on this on problem
set so people have been asking about
ions all right so when we're just here
filling up our 4s ones for s we're
putting in first and then we're going to
our 3d which is what we just learned
about but what actually happens when you
start putting electrons in your D
orbitals is that the orbital energy of
the D orbitals drops below the 4s so
once they start becoming filled you have
this change that happens and this is
really only important when you're
talking about ions so we if we were
asking here about this one so we would
normally say okay we put our two 4s in
and then we have two three D electrons
but now because we've started to fill
the 3 D if we're going to really do this
in terms of energy level we could
reverse the order and we would accept
both of these for the neutral eye on you
could do either here but importantly
when you if you start ionizing it and
losing electrons you need to think where
are those electrons coming from which
are the electrons that are easiest to
remove and what happens is that you end
up losing the 4s to electrons and so the
configuration then for titanium plus 2
is just 3d - and so this is different
ions behave differently and that's now
you can go run and finish problem set to
that last question and this is because
now we are at the end of exam 1 material
so one thing I didn't get to it said in
the beginning number 12 on the problem
set we're not going to get to until next
week so if you've done number 12 already
you can turn it in it won't be graded
and you can turn it in again on problem
set 3 so you won't have waste of time
but that won't be on exam 1 material so
this is the end of exam 1 material and
read your instructions for the exams
very carefully and there's a couple
questions but I think it's too noisy to
answer them note that not everyone is
taking the exam in this room and you
need to go to the appropriate place so
please look at the instructions alright
and who won the clicker competition for
today
recitation 12